.. _sbdotcfg:

************************
The simplebuild.cfg file
************************

Each simplebuild bundle of packages is defined by a single ``simplebuild.cfg``
file, usually located at the root directory under which all the packages are
located. It serves a few different purposes:

* When invoked, the ``sb`` command will look first in the current directory,
  then recursively in the parent directories for such a file - which is then
  taken as the actual *master cfg* file associated with that invocation of
  ``sb``. This is for instance analogous to the way most Git-users are used to
  working (the ``git`` commands searches the current and parent directories for
  a ``.git/`` directory), and allows for instance a mode of operation
  where simplebuild users can simply clone a code repository and then step into
  it and invoke the ``sb`` command to start compiling the simplebuild packages
  in that repository (assuming for instance that the repository contains a
  ``simplebuild.cfg`` package at its root).
* It specifies dependencies on other simplebuild package bundles, which
  will cause simplebuild to search for these bundles and include their packages.
* It can be used to fine-tune the build process, e.g. to enable debug builds,
  specify the cache directory location, or to only build certain packages, which
  might be useful in larger projects.

Automatic creation
==================

If you are creating a new simplebuild project, you can get easily started by
simply invoking ``sb --init [optional flags]`` in the directory under which you
wish to keep your package bundle. As explained in `the dedicated documentation
for sb -\-init <./cmdline.html#new-project-initialisation-options>`_, this will
generate a ``simplebuild.cfg`` file for you. Below here is repeated the file
which is generated by ``sb --init`` without any other arguments. As you can see,
it contains a lot of comments with explanation and examples, which is convenient
for when you will be editing the file later:

.. collapse:: Click to show simplebuild.cfg generated by sb --init

  .. literalinclude:: ../build/autogen_freshsbinit/simplebuild.cfg
    :language: toml

|

..
  Note that the | character just above is to insert a bit more vertical space
  here, since the collapse box seems to not add enough space after itself.


Format
======

Technically, ``simplebuild.cfg`` files are in `TOML <https://toml.io/en/>`_
format, and contain entries (TOML keys) in three sections (TOML tables)
discussed in the following. All entries are optional and even an empty
``simplebuild.cfg`` might be enough for simple projects. As such, **many users
will not have to worry about the format of this file**. Note that file system
paths specified can be either relative or absolute, and that relative paths are
always interpreted relative to the directory in which the ``simplebuild.cfg``
file is located.

The ``[project]`` section
-------------------------

Information about the associated package bundle.

* ``name`` (string): If you wish to let other projects use your bundle of
  packages, you must give it a name (so they can specify it in their
  ``depend.projects`` list). Valid names are lowercase and alphanumeric
  (underscores allowed, must start with a letter).

* ``pkg_root`` (string): Path to the top-level directory of the package
  bundle. Defaults to ``"."``, i.e. the same directory as the one containing the
  ``simplebuild.cfg``.

* ``env_paths`` (array of strings): An advanced setting, allowing bundles to modify
  environment paths to inject simplebuild installation folders as
  appropriate. As the ``core`` bundle already modifies ``PATH`` and ``PYTHONPATH``,
  most users should NOT need to use this parameter. The following example (from
  the ``core`` bundle) illustrates the syntax:

  .. code-block:: toml

    [project]
      #..
      env_paths = [ "PATH:<install>/bin:<install>/scripts",
                    "PYTHONPATH:<install>/python" ]


The ``[depend]`` section
------------------------

Information about which other bundles the current package bundle depends on.

* ``projects`` (array of strings): Names of other bundles on which the bundle
  depends. The ``core`` bundle (with the :sbpkg:`Core` package) is always an implicit
  dependency and does not need to be listed.
* ``search_path`` (array of strings): Local paths to ``simplebuild.cfg`` files
  (or the directories in which they reside). This advanced variable will help
  simplebuild to actually locate the package bundles that are specified as
  dependencies in the ``projects`` key. Any dependency not found via these
  search paths will be attempted to be located via the python-module-search
  mechanism (see :ref:`below <sbpymodsearchpath>`). The ``core`` and
  ``core_val`` bundles are always available via this latter mechanism (the same
  goes for the ``dgcode`` and ``dgcode_val`` bundles, if the
  ``simple-build-dgcode`` package has been installed).


The ``[build]`` section
-----------------------

Information related to the build process. Note that only the ``[build]`` section
of the master ``simplebuild.cfg`` file is considered. Any ``[build]`` section in
a bundle which is simply being used by another bundle, will be completely
ignored.

* ``cachedir`` (string): A relative path to the temporary directory in which
  simplebuild will place temporary build output. Defaults to
  ``"./simplebuild_cache"``.

* ``pkg_filter`` (array of string): A list of filter expressions, which can be
  used to selectively enable only some packages in the enabled bundles for
  consideration (the default is to enable all packages). This is obviously
  primarily useful for projects with a very large number of packages. Note that
  this concerns packages being *explicitly* enabled. Any package needed by
  those, will be *implicitly* enabled. Thus, to build a package 'MyPkg', you
  only need to enable explicitly enable 'MyPkg', even if 'MyPkg' itself depends
  on many other packages. The syntax for package filter specification is rather
  extended, and is discussed in a dedicated section :ref:`below <sbpkgfilterspec>`.

* ``mode`` (string): A string which must be either ``"release"`` (the default)
  or ``"debug"``. Changing it to the latter enables all binaries to be build with
  debug symbols enabled, which is sometimes useful for expert-level debugging.


.. _sbpkgfilterspec:

Package filters
---------------

The most simple package filter entries, are simply the names of packages:

.. code-block:: toml

  pkg_filter = ['MyPkg','MyOtherPkg']

A filter can be positive (default) or negative (those prefixed with
``!``). Thus, you can exclude ``MyPkg`` (and any packages needing ``MyPkg``) by:

.. code-block:: toml

  pkg_filter = ['!MyPkg']

If any positive filters are defined, a pkg must match at least one of them to
pass. If any negative filters are defined, a pkg must match none of them, to
pass.

You can use fnmatch-like wildcards. The following matches both MyPkg and
MyOtherPkg:

.. code-block:: toml

  pkg_filter = ['My*']

Filters with ``/`` in them are matched on the full path relative to their
``pkg_root``, otherwise matching is just based on the package name. So if
``MyPkg`` is physically located at ``<pkgroot>/some/where/MyPkg``, the string to
match for filters with ``/`` in them would be
``some/where/MyPkg``. I.e. ``MyPkg`` would be enabled by:

.. code-block:: toml

  pkg_filter = ['some/where/*']

Filters can use regular expressions, simply prefix them with ``RE::``. Here is
an example with both a positive and a negative filter, selecting packages whose
names include the word ``Util``, but does not include the word ``test``. The ``(?i)``
makes the latter case-insensitive, so ``MyUtilsTests`` and ``MyUtils_tests`` would
both be excluded. ``MyUtils`` would be accepted, but ``My_utils`` would not:

.. code-block:: toml

  pkg_filter = ['RE::.*Util.*','!RE::(?i).*test.*']

Commas (``,``) can not be used in filters, but serve to separate filter
items. In fact, the two following pkg filters are identical:

.. code-block:: toml

  pkg_filter = [ 'My*','!MyBrokenPkg' ]

.. code-block:: toml

  pkg_filter = [ 'My*,!MyBrokenPkg' ]



Advanced topics
===============

The SIMPLEBUILD_CFG variable
----------------------------

Advanced users  maintaining several interdependent simplebuild package bundles,
might wish to override the automatic search for a master ``simplebuild.cfg``
file based on the current working directory. For that purpose, one can use the
``SIMPLEBUILD_CFG`` environment variable to point to a particular
``simplebuild.cfg`` file. In this case, the indicated file is simply taken to be
the master file, and the current working directory is ignored (in fact, in this
case the file does not even have to be named ``simplebuild.cfg``).

For instance, they might wish to be able to freely switch their current working
directory between directories inside two different interdependent bundles, and
be able to always build both bundles when invoking ``sb``, irrespective of their
current working directory. For such working modes, these advanced users can
simply create a ``simplebuild_everything.cfg`` file (the name can be anything)
with appropriate entries in the ``[depend]`` section and set::

  export SIMPLEBUILD_CFG=/some/where/simplebuild_everything.cfg


.. _sbpymodsearchpath:

Bundle search via Python modules
--------------------------------

In addition to the ``project.search_path`` key in the ``simplebuild.cfg`` file
above, simplebuild is also able to discover local bundles through a `Python
plugin
<https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/creating-and-discovering-plugins/>`_
mechanism. This is in fact how bundles like ``core`` and ``core_val`` are made
easily available for all users without requiring them to edit their
``project.search_path`` (the same goes for the ``dgcode`` and ``dgcode_val``
bundles, if the ``simple-build-dgcode`` package has been installed).

Specifically, simplebuild will look for Python modules whose names follow the
pattern ``[_]simplebuild_[anything].simplebuild_bundle_list``. Inside that module
there must be a function called ``simplebuild_bundle_list()`` which returns a
list of pathlib.Path objects, each being an absolute path to a
``simplebuild.cfg`` file. As an example, installing the ``simple-build-dgcode``
package, results in a new Python module becoming available in the environment:
``simplebuild_dgcode.simplebuild_bundle_list``, with a
``simplebuild_bundle_list()`` returning the full path to two ``simplebuild.cfg``
files: one for the ``dgcode`` bundle, and one for the ``dgcode_val`` bundle.

Search path redirection
-----------------------

Very few people will need this feature, but for completeness we mention here the
possibility to add ``simplebuild_redirect.cfg`` files, which themselves
essentially just contain a list of search paths. If a directory added to the
``project.search_path`` contains such a redirection file, all of the search
paths found in it will themselves be added to the search path.

.. collapse:: Click to show an example of such a redirection file.

  .. literalinclude:: ../../simplebuild_redirect.cfg
    :language: toml


|

..
  Note that the | character just above is to insert a bit more vertical space
  here, since the collapse box seems to not add enough space after itself.
